SPI One Pager (#65)
IEEE-UCF/Gaming-CPU-Project: docs/ip-briefs/IO_SPI_Brief(v1.0).md

Reviewer: Looking good so far, just need a little more descriptiveness and formatting fixes. Please add heading syntax (##) to each section for visuals and feel free to use bullet points (-) or (*) to organize info

# SPI - Module Brief (v1.0)

**Owner:** Nicholas McNeill 
**RTL:** rtl/io/spi.sv

Purpose & Role:  
The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) is a high speed, 4-wire, full-duplex communication protocol used for short distance data exchange between microcontrollers and peripherals. It uses a shared clock signal to synchronize data transfer.

> Parameters (Registers) & Signals:  

Reviewer: Please split parameters and input/output signals into separate tables to prevent confusion

Resides on the AXI-Lite Interconnect bus, in a Master (CPU) to Slave (SPI) configuration. All register reads and writes are performed through AXI-Lite signals.

| Name | Addr. | Default Val | Purpose |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| SPDR (Data register) | 000 | R/W 0x00 | Holds the byte to be transmitted or the byte just recieved |
| SPCR (Control Register) | 001 | R/W 0x00 | Enables SPI< selects master/slave mode, and sets clock polarity |
| SPSR (Status Register) | 010 | R/W 0x02 | Indicates transfer completion, write collisions, and mode faults. |

> | SPBR (Baud Rate Register) | 011 | R/W 0x02 | Sets the clock frequency divider for the SCK signal. |

Reviewer: `Baud Rate`, although applicable here, is a specific terminology for UART since it uses asynchronous clock signals. To prevent confusion, please use a different name like suggested below:

```suggestion
| SPCD (Clock Divider Register) | 011 | R/W 0x02 | Sets the clock frequency divider for the SCK signal. |
```

> | CSCR (Chip Select Register) | 100 | R/w 0xFF | **Manages multiple Slave Select lines for peripheral addressing.** |

Reviewer: Not sure why the description here is highlighted, might just be a formatting error

| Signal | Dir | Size | Description |
| clk_o | Out | 1b  | Serial Clock generated by the Master to synchronize data. |
| Mosi_o | Out | 1b  | Master Output, Slave Input; carries data from SoC to peripheral. |
| Miso_i | In  | 1b  | Master Input, Slave Output; carries data from peripheral to SoC. |
| Ss_n_o | Out | 4b  | Slave Select (Active Low) to enable specific external devices. |
| Axi_lite_\* | M&lt;-&gt;S | Var | Standard AXI-Lite bus signals (AWADDR, WDATA, RDATA, etc.) for register access. |
| Irq_o | Out | 1b  | Interrupt request sent to CPU upon transfer completion or error. |

Configurations:  

> Clock Modes: Supports all four SPI modes defined by CPOL and CPHA to ensure compatibility with various peripheral timing requirements.Master/Slave: Primarily configured as a Master in SoC environments, but can be toggled to Slave mode via the SPCR.Baud Rate: The sclk_o frequency is derived by dividing the system clock by the value in SPBR.AXI-Lite valid/ready signals are required for internal register stability before data is shifted out to the physical SPI lines.

Reviewer: If possible, define CPOL and CPHA for members to understand how they affect SPI's behavior.

Behavior & Timing:  
Timing is strictly governed by clk_o. Data is shifted out and shifted in simultaneously during every clock cycle. To reduce CPU overhead, 16-byte Rx/Tx FIFOs are utilized. Interrupts are triggered when Rx reaches a threshold or the Tx is empty.

Errors & Dependencies:  

> Erros are managed by irq_o. Several errors can occur; write collision, mode fault, dependencies, or GPIO.

Reviewer: Please give one-line descriptions of what each of these errors is and how it happens (Also typo on "erros" in description)
